Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is neurodegenerative disease that affects the neurons. As neurons degenerate scarring and hardening occurs, referred to sclerosis. People with ALS suffer from gradual loss of muscle movement. The loss of muscle movement deteriorates the ability to speak, swallow, and breathe. ALS became well known in the United States when it affected baseball player Lou Gehrig - whose name has become synonymous with the disease (Lou Gehrig's disease). While there is no known cure or cause, doctors and researchers have been able to offer treatments to extend life expectancy.

There are two types of ALS: sporadic and familial. Sporadic is the most common form of ALS with about 90% of cases in the United States being sporadic. Familial accounts for the rest of the cases. Sporadic ALS can affect anyone at any time, whereas familial is inherited from family members. ALS comes from genetic mutations and there have been several different mutations that have been associated with the onset of ALS. ALS is marked by muscle weakness and trouble with everyday activities such as breathing, swallowing, and walking. As ALS progresses, most lose the ability to use their legs and arms. They also become unable to speak or swallow food, and eventually lose the ability to breathe on their own.

There is no way to diagnosis ALS clearly. Diagnosis is primarily done through observing symptoms such as muscle weakness and poor motor control. Since ALS only affects motor neurons sense such as sight and smell are not affected. Further testing may be done in order to confirm that the symptoms are not due to another condition. These tests include: electomyography (EMG), blood and urine tests, x-rays, MRIs, and biopsies. Although diagnosing ALS is difficult, the error rate of diagnosis is less that ten percent.

While there is no known cure for ALS, there have been ways to prolong life for those affected. Medication such as Riluzole has been shown to extend life expectancy. Breathing support may be used to assist those whose ability to breathe has weakened. Other types of treatment such as physical therapy may delay the progression of ALS by working out the muscles. Besides all of these treatments, care teams do their best to provide as much help and comfort for patients as needed. There is ongoing research to find a cure for ALS and to learn more about the disease.

ALS is a non-curable disorder with the cause still unknown. ALS causes the death of neurons which results in the degeneration of muscle movement. ALS comes with many obstacles including a difficult diagnosis as well as no available cure. Research on ALS is focusing on discovering abnormality in gene sequences in efforts to find a cure. While research is ongoing, doctors and researchers have been able to develop treatments that may extend a patient's life expectancy.
